content/posts/neovim-plugins-handsfree.md, before:

---
title: "Look Ma, no Neovim plugin manager!"
date: 2022-05-14T07:47:32+01:00
tags: ["bash", "neovim"]
categories: ["SyOps"]
description: "How to manually install NeoVim plugins without a package manner"
enableToc: false
draft: true
---

## Handsfree

To manually install a [Neovim](https://neovim.io/) plugin without using a plug-in manager (using [Tim Pope's Commentary](https://github.com/tpope/vim-commentary) as an example) then at the terminal:

```bash
mkdir -p ~/.local/share/nvim/site/pack/tpope/start/commentary
git clone https://tpope.io/vim/commentary.git ~/.local/share/nvim/site/pack/tpope/start/commentary
nvim -u NONE -c "helptags ALL" -c q
```

## Automation

Which is great, but from time to time your plugins will get updated and you will need to pull fresh versions.  This can easily be achieved with a small script.  Create a file named ___~/.local/bin/vimpluginupdate___ and paste the following:

```bash
#!/bin/sh
NVMPTH='$HOME/.local/share/nvim/site/pack'
git -C "$NVMPTH/tpope/start/commentary" pull || git clone --depth 1 https://tpope.io/vim/commentary.git $NVMPTH/tpope/start/commentary
nvim -u NONE -c "helptags ALL" -c q
```

The rather long git line pulls the repository if it already exists, and if it does not exist (i.e. you haven't done the first step) then it clones a fresh one (using the ___depth___ option to just get the latest version and not previous changes).

Now make the file executable:

```bash
chmod u+x ~/.local/bin/vimpluginupdate
```

And whenever you want to update your plugins run:

```bash
vimpluginupdate
```

As you install more updates simply add new lines (ensuring that the helptags line remains the last line of the file).

## But I use vim?

All I've really done here is amended the [vim-commentary install section](https://github.com/tpope/vim-commentary#installation), so check that out for standard vim (NB - the main difference is the directory used).

## I demand an authoritative source 

See [:help packages](https://neovim.io/doc/user/repeat.html#packages) and [:help add-package](https://neovim.io/doc/user/usr_05.html#05.4)

Commit message:

Added version and path explain

content/posts/neovim-plugins-handsfree.md, after:

---
title: "Look Ma, no Neovim plugin manager!"
date: 2022-05-14T07:47:32+01:00
tags: ["bash", "neovim"]
categories: ["SyOps"]
description: "How to manually install NeoVim plugins without a package manner"
enableToc: false
draft: true
---

## Handsfree

To manually install a [Neovim](https://neovim.io/) plugin, for example [Tim Pope's Commentary](https://github.com/tpope/vim-commentary), without using a plug-in manager then at the terminal :

```bash
mkdir -p ~/.local/share/nvim/site/pack/tpope/start/commentary
git clone https://tpope.io/vim/commentary.git ~/.local/share/nvim/site/pack/tpope/start/commentary
nvim -u NONE -c "helptags ALL" -c q
```

The install path always follows the pattern of ___~/.local/share/nvim/site/pack/foo/start/bar___, where the variables ___foo___ and ___bar___ can be whatever makes sense to you.

## Automation

Which is great, but from time to time your plugins will get updated and you will need to pull fresh versions.  This can easily be achieved on Linux systems with a small script.  Create a file named ___~/.local/bin/vimpluginupdate___ and paste the following:

```bash
#!/bin/sh
NVMPTH='$HOME/.local/share/nvim/site/pack'
git -C "$NVMPTH/tpope/start/commentary" pull || git clone --depth 1 https://tpope.io/vim/commentary.git $NVMPTH/tpope/start/commentary
nvim -u NONE -c "helptags ALL" -c q
```

The rather long git line pulls the repository if it already exists, and if it does not exist (i.e. you haven't done the first step) then it clones a fresh one (using the ___depth___ option to just get the latest version and not previous changes).

Now make the file executable:

```bash
chmod u+x ~/.local/bin/vimpluginupdate
```

And whenever you want to update your plugins run:

```bash
vimpluginupdate
```

As you install more updates simply add new lines (ensuring that the helptags line remains the last line of the file).

## But I use vim?

All I've really done here is amended the [vim-commentary install section](https://github.com/tpope/vim-commentary#installation), so check that out for standard vim (NB - the main difference is the directory used).

## I demand an authoritative source 

See [:help packages](https://neovim.io/doc/user/repeat.html#packages) and [:help add-package](https://neovim.io/doc/user/usr_05.html#05.4).

## Version control

This was tested corrected on Ubuntu Linux 22.04 LTS and Neovim v0.7.0.
